Kernel Boot on x86-64
=====================

## `boot/compressed/`

- `vmlinux` in the root directory is objcopy'ed to `boot/compressed/` as
  `$(obj)/vmlinux.bin`, and is stripped
- `$(obj)/vmlinux.bin` is gzipped as `$(obj)/vmlinux.bin.gz`.
- generate `piggy.S` that `.incbin $(obj)/vmlinux.bin.gz` with the help of
  `mkpiggy`
- `piggy.S` and other sources under the directory are compiled into
  `$(obj)/vmlinux` (not the one in the root directory), using
  `$(obj)/vmlinux.lds`.

## `boot/`

- `$(obj)/compressed/vmlinux` is objcopy'ed here as `$(obj)/vmlinux.bin`.
- `setup.elf` is compiled from sources under this directory, using `setup.ld`.
- `setup.elf` is stripped as `setup.bin`
- `setup.bin` and `vmlinux.bin` are put together by `tools/build` to create
  `bzImage`.
  - `build` patches the header to give correct values.

## Bootloader

- `Document/x86/boot.rst`
- Bootloader loads first some KB of the kernel to a place it chooses.
  - It contains the header and real-mode code.
- Bootloader also loads protect-mode code to the right place.
  - The right place is given by `code32_start` of the header
  - It is usually in the high memory, which is not accessible in real mode
  - So the bootloader might either enter protected mode
  - Or, use `Int 15/AH=87h`, <http://www.ctyme.com/intr/rb-1527.htm>
- It then jumps to the start of the header.

## 16-bit Real-Mode

- It starts from `boot/header.S`.  The first two bytes of the header is a jump
  instruction.  It jumps to `start_of_setup`, to call `main` in `boot/main.c`.
- `protected_mode_jump` called by `go_to_protected_mode` enters the 32-bit
  protected mode and jumps to the start of protected-mode code at
  `code32_start`

## 32-bit Protected Mode and 64-bit Long Mode

- It usually starts from `startup_32` in `boot/compressed/head_64.S`
  - it sets up identity page tables, enables paging, enters long mode
    (64-bit mode), and jumps to `startup_64`
- `startup_64` decompresses the kernel
  - The compressed kernel is loaded at `code32_start` by current bootloader,
    which is hardcoded at `0x100000`.  Future bootloader should load it to
    `pref_address`, which is `LOAD_PHYSICAL_ADDR`.
  - The decompressor wants to decompress it to `LOAD_PHYSICAL_ADDR` for
    non-relocatable kernel or decompress in-place for relocatable kernel.
  - The decompressed kernel is an elf image.  It is parsed and its elf programs
    are copied in-place to the right place.
  - It has in `ebp` the loaded address (`code32_start` or `pref_address`) and in
    `ebx` the `LOAD_PHYSICAL_ADDR` (usually the same, 0x1000000 since 2.6.31).
    The size difference between the uncompressed/compressed images plus
    necessary decompress offset is in `z_extract_offset`.
  - It copies the compressed kernel from loaded address to physical address
    (`ebx`).  It is copied backward to allow in-place copy.  It is copied to the
    end of physical address to allow in-place decompressions.
- finally, it jumps to another `startup_64` in `kernel/head_64.S`
  - with identity-mapped address space
  - the stack is set up by `movq initial_stack(%rip), %esp`
  - jumps to `x86_64_start_kernel`, which calls `start_kernel`.

## Kernel

- Linux x86 boot protocol is defined in `Documentation/x86/boot.rst`
  - the bootloader should load the kernel to certain memory addresses
  - the first sector of the kernel is used for communications between the
    bootloader and the kernel: how big is the kernel?  where did the bootloader
    write the commandline to?  where was the initramfs loaded?
- After arch specific early boot code, `start_kernel` in `init/main.c` is called.
  - it prints a "Linux version" banner
  - it calls `setup_arch`
  - it spawns a thread to run `kernel_init`
    - the thread is the first and has pid 1
    - it will later `do_execve("/sbin/init")`
- see <../init.md>

## Resources

- `/proc/iomem`
- During `setup_arch`, `e820__reserve_resources` is called to turn
  non-reserved e820 entries into resources.
  - Incidentally, `e820__setup_pci_gap` decides `pci_mem_start`, which finds a gap
    between e820 entries that is high and large enough.
- In subsys initcalls, `pcibios_init` is called.  It calls
  `pcibios_resource_survey` to allocate PCI resources.  That calls
  `e820__reserve_resources_late` to insert the rest of e820 entries.
